==================================================
Title: Trump welcomes China's Xi with fanfare, but no breakthroughs emerge
Author: Reuters
URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/china/trump-welcomes-xi-washington-looking-trade-win-2026-09-24/
Source PDF: 206 - Trump welcomes China_s Xi with fanfare, but no breakthroughs emerge _ Reuters.pdf
==================================================

Learn more about
Subscribe
Trump welcomes China's Xi with fanfare, but no breakthroughs emerge
By Trevor Hunnicutt and David Brunnstrom
September 23, 2026 10:02 PM PDT · Updated 14 hours ago
XXXXXXXXXiiiiiiiii JJJJJJJJJiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnpppppppppiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnggggggggg iiiiiiiiisssssssss aaaaaaaaattttttttt ttttttttthhhhhhhhheeeeeeeee WWWWWWWWWhhhhhhhhhiiiiiiiiittttttttteeeeeeeee HHHHHHHHHooooooooouuuuuuuuussssssssseeeeeeeee fffffffffooooooooorrrrrrrrr hhhhhhhhhiiiiiiiiisssssssss fififififififififirrrrrrrrrsssssssssttttttttt vvvvvvvvviiiiiiiiisssssssssiiiiiiiiittttttttt tttttttttooooooooo UUUUUUUUUnnnnnnnnniiiiiiiiittttttttteeeeeeeeeddddddddd SSSSSSSSStttttttttaaaaaaaaattttttttteeeeeeeeesssssssss iiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnn ttttttttthhhhhhhhhrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee yyyyyyyyyeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaarrrrrrrrrsssssssss aaaaaaaaannnnnnnnnddddddddd tttttttttaaaaaaaaalllllllllkkkkkkkkksssssssss wwwwwwwwwiiiiiiiiittttttttthhhhhhhhh PPPPPPPPPrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeesssssssssiiiiiiiiidddddddddeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnttttttttt T TTTTTTTTrrrrrrrrruuuuuuuuummmmmmmmmppppppppp ooooooooovvvvvvvvveeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrr
mmmmmmmmmaaaaaaaaajjjjjjjjjooooooooorrrrrrrrr iiiiiiiiissssssssssssssssssuuuuuuuuueeeeeeeeesssssssss iiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnn ttttttttthhhhhhhhheeeeeeeee UUUUUUUUU.........SSSSSSSSS.........---------CCCCCCCCChhhhhhhhhiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnaaaaaaaaa rrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeelllllllllaaaaaaaaatttttttttiiiiiiiiiooooooooonnnnnnnnnssssssssshhhhhhhhhiiiiiiiiippppppppp.........
Summary Companies
Trump rolls out red carpet as leaders seek stability despite deep tensions
Trade truce extension envisaged, but major breakthroughs not expected
Xi enters summit with stronger hand given trade surge and rare-earth dominance
WASHINGTON, Sept 24 (Reuters) - US President Donald Trump welcomed Chinese President Xi Jinping to the White House on Thursday for a lavish
summit that was heavy on symbolism but light on substance, with no sign of breakthroughs on thorny issues such as AI, trade, Taiwan and the war with
Iran.
The two leaders and their wives attended a state dinner, a black-tie affair of sesame-crusted sea bass and a guest list heavy with tech CEOs. Outside the
gate, a group of loud protesters shouted slogans like "China out of Hong Kong" that were clearly audible to the leaders as they posed for pictures on the
red-carpeted White House steps.
Make sense of global markets with the Trading Day newsletter. Sign up here.
In his dinner toast, Trump said he and Xi "both understand we represent different systems but the ties between our people endure and we’ve never gotten
along better."

Trump then invited dinner guests to tour the site of the new ballroom he is building nearby, hours after showing Xi a helipad he had had built in the White
House complex. Construction projects are a frequent digression for a president who has put a lot of focus on remaking Washington's physical
infrastructure.
Xi said he and Trump had in-depth discussions and reached "common understanding on many issues" that provided "new strategic guidance for China-
US relations." He did not elaborate.
"China and the United States must act as responsible major countries," he said, calling for "a new approach for major countries to get along with each
other."
The meeting was striking for where it took place – in Washington, even as scores of world leaders were in New York for the United Nations General
Assembly.
It took place at a time of rising public concern about the swift growth of AI, and as Trump struggles to resolve a war his administration and Israel began
with Iran, which has sharply driven up energy prices and weighed heavily on his public approval as November midterm elections approach.
TAIWAN TALKS
During a bilateral discussion in the afternoon, Xi urged the US to oppose "Taiwan independence," according to a readout from the official Chinese news
agency – addressing one of the thorniest issues between the two countries. The White House has not yet provided its own summary of the talks.
Xi had been expected to press Trump this week to halt arms sales to Taiwan. Following his visit to China in May, Trump said he was holding in abeyance
an arms package to Taiwan worth some $14 billion and called it a "very good negotiating chip."
That move left some US allies in Asia and even some of Trump's fellow Republicans concerned that he may be tempted to soften Washington's support
for Taipei in exchange for economic wins. China claims democratically governed Taiwan as its own territory and has not ruled out using force to gain
control over the island.
The summit between the two leaders came shortly after Trump forcefully defended his use of military power in a speech at the UN earlier this week,
suggesting he could "annihilate" Iran. He took a strikingly different tone with Xi on Thursday, reflecting a power balance that has shifted toward the
Chinese leader after a trade war that ended with a US climbdown on tariffs.
[1/5] Chinese President Xi Jinping and US President Donald Trump speak during a state dinner at the White House in Washington, D.C., US, September 24, 2026. REUTERS/Evelyn
Hockstein Purchase Licensing Rights

In remarks after Xi's arrival on Thursday, Trump emphasized his "truly great friendship" with Xi, rather than focusing on policy differences, and said the
two powers had made strides on trade since his trip to China in May.
Somewhat more pointely, Xi said the two countries' interests were deeply intertwined and that competition between them should be a "healthy one." US
companies were welcome in China, he said, adding that he hopes "Chinese companies are treated fairly here in the United States."
Xi also said both militaries should maintain regular dialogue to improve crisis prevention.
PERSONAL VS. NATIONAL
Edgard Kagan, a former senior White House official for East Asia, said the contrasting rhetoric demonstrates the different strategy of each leader.
"The president is casting it very much as about his personal relationship with Xi," said Kagan, now with the Center for Strategic and International
Studies. "What I found interesting was Xi is being much more cautious and suggesting that it's less about the personal relationship than the national
relationship."
The summit, Xi's first visit to Washington in more than a decade, is the second meeting this year between the leaders of the world's two biggest
economies.
For Trump, who relishes ceremony and prizes his ties with powerful leaders, the visit is as much a matter of national prestige as an opportunity for high-
stakes diplomacy.
But Trump and Xi's remarks were not carried live by any US television networks, which refused to provide footage in protest of the White House's ban of
CNN, MS Now and Politico.
During his comments on Thursday, Xi said both countries must "ensure that the development of AI is always under human control."
Analysts say intense competition between the two powers in AI is likely to limit the scope for anything beyond symbolic agreements.
There has been little sign Beijing is willing to exert pressure on Iran to yield to US demands. During Thursday's meeting, Xi expressed support for the US
and Iran to return to a ceasefire and eventually negotiate a peace deal, Xinhua reported.
The guest list for Thursday's state dinner includeD CEOs like Apple's Tim Cook, Amazon's Jeff Bezos, Alphabet's Sundar Pichai, OpenAI's Sam Altman,
Tesla's Elon Musk and Nvidia's Jensen Huang. Despite such an array, people familiar with US plans say Trump is likely to maintain firm export controls on
US tech Xi wants loosened.
Updates with dinner remarks, paragraphs 3-5
Reporting by David Brunnstrom, Andrea Shalal, David Lawder and Trevor Hunnicutt in Washington, Ben Blanchard and Yimou Lee in Taipei, and Joe Cash in Beijing; Writing by
Joseph Ax and Steve Holland; Editing by Don Durfee, Colleen Jenkins, Louise Heavens, Alistair Bell and Stephen Coates
Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Suggested Topics:
Artificial Intelligence ADAS, AV & Safety Software-Defined Vehicle Sustainable & EV Supply Chain Regulatory & Policy
Purchase Licensing Rights
Trevor Hunnicutt
Thomson Reuters
Trevor Hunnicutt is White House Correspondent at Reuters News. He writes about U.S. foreign and domestic policy and
regularly travels with the President of the United States. Prior to joining the White House team in 2021, he covered
presidential campaigns, economics, finance and investing for many years. He has also served on the board of the White
House Correspondents' Association. Hunnicutt holds a bachelor's degree from Pomona College and a master's from the
London School of Economics.
Read Next
Business
China fuels rush to turn AI video into an industry
9 hours ago

World
US appeals court upholds Pentagon's blacklisting of Anthropic
43 mins ago
ANALYSIS
Oracle, Blue Owl project delay sends ripples through AI financing, sources say
8 hours ago
Business
Meta's Charm gadget carries CEO Zuckerberg's big AI ambitions
September 24, 2026
World
US immigration crackdown hits Kansas, disrupts beef processing
United States · September 25, 2026 · 11:23 AM PDT · 15 mins ago

US immigration agents fanned out across southwest Kansas, home to a large concentration of
feedlots and slaughterhouses, this week in an operation that had immediate effects on the beef
industry, community organizers and local officials said.
Asia Pacific
Imran Khan's party postpones planned Islamabad march to October 4
26 mins ago
Business
Canadian dollar heads for third straight weekly decline on wider yield spreads
31 mins ago
WHO says Congo Ebola outbreak spreads to two new health zones
37 mins ago
World
Converse pauses social media ads, marketing after racism uproar, Bloomberg News reports
40 mins ago
Latest Browse
Home World
Authors Business
Topic Sitemap Markets
Archive Sustainability
Article Sitemap Legal
Breakingviews
Media
Technology
Videos
Investigations
Pictures
Sports
Graphics
Science
Podcasts
Lifestyle
About Reuters
About Reuters
Media Center
Advertise with Us
Careers
Reuters News Agency
Brand Attribution Guidelines
Reuters and AI
Reuters Leadership
Reuters Fact Check

Reuters Diversity Report
Commercial Disclosure (Japan)
Stay Informed
Download the App (iOS)
Download the App (Android)
Newsletters
Subscribe
Information you can trust
Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions
of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via
desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.
Follow Us
LSEG Products
Workspace
Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and
mobile.
Data Catalogue
Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
World-Check
Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human
networks.
Advertise With Us Advertising Guidelines Purchase Licensing Rights
All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a list of exchanges and delays.
Cookies Terms & Conditions Privacy Copyright Digital Accessibility Corrections Data Disclosure and Sources Site Feedback
Manage Cookies & Your Privacy Choices
© 2026 Reuters. All rights reserved