==================================================
Title: White House pushes for speedy review of voter rolls in hunt for noncitizen voters
Author: Reuters
URL: https://www.reuters.com/legal/government/white-house-pushes-speedy-review-voter-rolls-hunt-noncitizen-voters-2026-09-24/
Source PDF: 208 - White House pushes for speedy review of voter rolls in hunt for noncitizen voters _ Reuters.pdf
==================================================

Learn more about
Subscribe
White House pushes for speedy review of voter rolls in hunt for
noncitizen voters
By Kristina Cooke and Peter Eisler
September 24, 2026 3:02 AM PDT · Updated September 24, 2026
A North Carolina Election Integrity Team sign in Spanish warning non-citizens not to vote and that doing so could lead to deportation, a
notice that advocacy groups say could intimidate... Purchase Licensing Rights Read more
Summary
DHS is reviewing at least 47 state voter rolls under its Unlawful Voter Initiative, email shows

Agency using commercial data service to supplement redacted voter rolls, internal email shows
Experts and officials warn process could lead to citizens being falsely flagged as illegal voters
Sept 24 (Reuters) - The White House has pushed federal agencies to accelerate their review of at least
47 state voter rolls obtained by the Department of Homeland Security, according to an internal email
seen by Reuters, part of an unprecedented effort to find noncitizens among registered voters as
midterm elections near.
DHS has surged hundreds of officers from across the US security and immigration apparatuses in
recent months to comb the rolls for evidence of voter fraud under its Unlawful Voter Initiative, current
and former officials said.
Jumpstart your morning with the latest legal news delivered straight to your inbox from The Daily
Docket newsletter. Sign up here.
The September 1 email sent by a DHS official briefs colleagues on the review of voter rolls. It shows
how the effort is being directed by the White House — and that agency officials are struggling to meet
the goals set out for them. At one point, it notes that a DHS official "has offered to raise with the WH
COS if we can't get forward progress," a reference to White House Chief of Staff Susie Wiles.
The email also reveals that the agency is using a commercial data broker to find sensitive voter
information not included in publicly available rolls, which officials and experts warn could lead to
citizens being falsely flagged as illegal voters and potentially detained.
The review is the latest attempt by President Donald Trump to vindicate his longstanding assertion
that noncitizen voting is widespread in US elections – a claim that has collapsed repeatedly for lack of
evidence.
His administration has also urged Republicans to “nationalize” voting in at least 15 places and sought
to restrict mail-in balloting, even though the US Constitution gives states, not the federal government,
primary authority over election administration.
Critics say the hunt for noncitizen voters is part of a broader strategy to undermine confidence in
elections and warn it could disenfranchise legal voters. Multiple studies and audits - including a
Reuters analysis in July - have found that the number of unauthorized votes cast in US elections is
statistically insignificant.
Reuters found this week that states may have added more than 30,000 noncitizens to their voter rolls
since 2000 due to software glitches and clerical errors, but it was unclear how many had cast a ballot,

and experts said the numbers were too small relative to the country’s 170 million registered voters to
affect elections.
A Reuters review in July found that only 129 people had been charged under the “Voting by Aliens”
statute since its 1996 enactment. The Trump administration has charged at least 20 more under the
statute in the months since.
The White House said in a statement that all cases of potential noncitizen voting would be pursued.
DHS said its investigative efforts are "conducted diligently and professionally in accordance with the
law," providing "an essential guarantee in the authenticity of our election results."
FALSE POSITIVES
It is unclear how DHS obtained the voter rolls from the 47 states referenced in the September email.
Since returning to office last year, Trump’s administration has demanded unredacted voter rolls from
nearly every state. While at least 16 states have agreed to hand over complete rolls with no redactions,
according to the Brennan Center for Justice at NYU Law, most have refused to comply.
As a consequence, DHS appears to have relied on public versions of voter rolls with certain personal
data removed, such as drivers’ license and Social Security numbers. To fill the gaps, the email shows,
DHS has “enriched” the redacted rolls with information bought from Accurint, a private service that
collects and sells personal data.
LexisNexis, which owns Accurint, declined to comment.
Federal investigators are matching the augmented voter roll data with records from other government
databases -- including Immigration and Customs Enforcement, US Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS), the US State Department and the Social Security Administration -- to identify
potential noncitizens, the email showed.
“We have 1,620 cases moving right now that are under investigation,” DHS Secretary Markwayne
Mullin told Fox News on Saturday, “and that list grows every single day.”
But some names in the voter rolls obtained by DHS lacked key details, such as year of birth, making it
difficult to match them across various databases, according to the email.
And a US official said the leads sent to agents in recent weeks often included false positives, including
citizens who had similar names as immigrants. Another person familiar with the effort said it also
mistakenly swept in US citizens born abroad.
DHS had only “some degree of confidence” that the individuals flagged by the review were
noncitizens who had "registered to vote and/or voted,” the email said.
Even being flagged "has very real life consequences," including additional scrutiny during air travel
and possible complications for those seeking naturalization, said Kerry Doyle, a former DHS deputy

general counsel.
"When there is a flag in the system, it's very difficult to fix it. It totally upends your life," Doyle said.
WHITE HOUSE ROLE
At USCIS, which typically processes legal immigration applications, hundreds of fraud detection and
national security officers were reassigned to the effort for at least three weeks starting in August,
according to three people familiar with the matter.
Officers were given a goal of vetting five names per hour, one of the people said, noting the target was
rarely met.
Agents with Homeland Security Investigations, a branch of ICE that usually investigates cross-border
crimes such as human trafficking, were also instructed to surge resources to determine whether
potential noncitizens could be charged with voting illegally, the US official said.
After a late August call with the White House, the email said, DHS officials held a meeting in which
"the ICE team appeared both unaware of what their leadership had committed to and also indicated
they weren't sure they could actually execute, particularly at the volume being sought.”
Some states have said the administration has been unable to back up its assertions of rampant voter
fraud.
In Nevada, for example, DHS said in July it had identified nearly 16,000 potential noncitizens on state
voter rolls. Pressed by the state for evidence, DHS said the figure was preliminary and it had verified
just 185 of those cases, according to the office of Nevada’s secretary of state.
The office said DHS declined to provide additional information requested by the state to verify the
initial claims.
Reporting by Kristina Cooke in San Francisco and Peter Eisler in Washington. Additional reporting by Tom Hals.
Editing by Jesse Mesner-Hage and Deepa Babington
Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Suggested Topics:
Government Public Policy U.S. Election Security Voting Rights & Elections Immigration
Purchase Licensing Rights
Kristina Cooke

Thomson Reuters
Kristina Cooke is a Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative reporter at Reuters focused on immigration and
criminal justice. She was part of a team awarded the Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting in 2026 for a series
on President Donald Trump’s campaign of political retribution. In 2025, she shared the Pulitzer Prize for
Investigative Reporting for a series on the fentanyl crisis. Her investigation with colleagues into migrant child
labor in the United States was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting in 2023, and a recipient of
the Polk and other awards. She speaks English, German and Spanish and is based in San Francisco.
Peter Eisler
Thomson Reuters
Peter Eisler is a reporter on Reuters’ Enterprise and Investigations team. His work focuses on political and
criminal justice issues. In 2026, he shared the Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting, awarded for a series of
stories examining President Donald Trump’s campaign of retribution against his perceived political foes.
Read Next / Editor's Picks
Litigation
FDA nominee Overton says all US vaccines safe as senators press on
shots, abortion, vaping
September 24, 2026
Government
Judge dismisses Trump lawsuit against Iowa newspaper and
pollster
September 24, 2026
Litigation
Trump rolled back regulations for oil company campaign donors,
Democrats say
September 24, 2026
Government
Trump ramps up noncitizen voting prosecutions ahead of midterms

September 23, 2026
Latest Browse
Home World
Authors Business
Topic Sitemap Markets
Archive Sustainability
Article Sitemap Legal
Breakingviews
Media
Technology
Videos
Investigations
Pictures
Sports
Graphics
Science
Podcasts
Lifestyle
About Reuters
About Reuters
Media Center
Advertise with Us
Careers
Reuters News Agency
Brand Attribution Guidelines
Reuters and AI
Reuters Leadership
Reuters Fact Check

Reuters Diversity Report
Commercial Disclosure (Japan)
Stay Informed
Download the App (iOS)
Download the App (Android)
Newsletters
Subscribe
Information you can trust
Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching
billions of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to
professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.
Follow Us
LSEG Products
Workspace
Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and
mobile.
Data Catalogue
Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
World-Check
Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and
human networks.
Advertise With Us Advertising Guidelines Purchase Licensing Rights
All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a list of exchanges and delays.

Cookies Terms & Conditions Privacy Copyright Digital Accessibility Corrections
Data Disclosure and Sources Site Feedback Manage Cookies & Your Privacy Choices
© 2026 Reuters. All rights reserved