Headline: Exclusive: Number of homeless students in Santa Clara County schools has nearly doubled since 2020
Subtitle: Around 6,800 homeless students were enrolled in Santa Clara County in 2023
Date: 2024-09-03
Publisher: Bay Area News Group

Number of homeless students in Santa Clara
County schools has nearly doubled since 2020


Around 6,800 homeless students were enrolled
in Santa Clara County in 2023
Juanita Campa’s 4-year-old son, Sergio Ricardo Rodriguez, who has autism, is comforted by his father, Ricardo
Rodriguez, as Campa shows this news organization the homeless encampment along Coyote Creek near Story
Road, where they used to live, on Tuesday, July 23, 2024, in San Jose, Calif. The family is currently living in an
interim housing program site in San Jose. (Dai Sugano/Bay Area News Group)
By ALINA TA | ata@bayareanewsgroup.com | Bay Area News Group


UPDATED: September 3, 2024 at 5:31 a.m.


After being evicted from her apartment, Juanita Campa was homeless for years, eventually
coming to live with her 4-year-old son and his father in the Jungle, an encampment along
the edge of San Jose’s Coyote Creek.


RELATED ARTICLES


New Santa Cruz law would prohibit unsanctioned government homeless drop-offs
Editorial: Prop. 36’s smart response to crime, addiction, homelessness
Can AI help solve homelessness? Gov. Newsom thinks so
San Jose to build its first safe sleeping site
Tiny homes housing vs. jail diversion sparks a fresh round of neighborhood outrage in San
Jose


More recently, though, they moved into a hotel that serves as transitional housing for
homeless children and their families. Campa’s next goal? To get her son, Sergio, who has
been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, enrolled in kindergarten.


“He’s a very smart kid,” Campa said. “He listens.”


Campa also hopes to move her family into a more permanent living situation. But until then,
Sergio will be among the rapidly growing ranks of unhoused students in South Bay schools.
Since 2020, the number of homeless students in Santa Clara County has almost doubled,
according to the California Department of Education.


About 1,200 students in the East Side Union High School District and Alum Rock Union
School District were reported to be homeless in 2024 — three times the number of
homeless students in 2020.


Three other counties in the Bay Area — Alameda, Contra Costa and San Mateo — had
between 2,100 and 4,700 homeless students enrolled in their schools in 2023. According to
the state, 10% to 12% of those students were living in temporary shelters that year.


The video player is currently playing an ad.


In the Alum Rock district, Superintendent Imee Almazan said the COVID-19 pandemic
exacerbated multiple economic issues that were out of the parents’ and the school district’s
control, leading to the increase in homeless youth.


“It goes back to economic hardships, loss of jobs, displacement. There’s just a number of
reasons why our families are growing in our (homeless youth) population,” Almazan said.
“And some of our families haven’t bounced back from that yet.”


Maryam Adalat, director of student services at East Side Union High School District, said
many families have lost stable housing, their jobs or loved ones who were the family’s main
provider since the COVID-19 pandemic.


Adalat said district staff have seen many families facing unstable housing and multiple
families living in a household. “We have students who are living in shelters. We actually
have foster youth that are unhoused as well,” she said.


Out of the 1,974 homeless students enrolled at East Side in 2022-2023, 488 were living in
temporary shelters, according to the state education department, while 75 students were
living in hotels and motels, and 33 students were temporarily unsheltered or living in
abandoned buildings, campgrounds, vehicles, trailer parks or train and bus stations.


A part of the homeless encampment along Coyote Creek near Story Road is seen in San Jose, Calif., on
Tuesday, July 23, 2024. (Dai Sugano/Bay Area News Group)


That same year, a majority of homeless students in the district were unable to pass the
Smarter Balanced Summative Assessments, standardized tests for mathematics and


language arts. Around 78% of homeless students were unable to meet the standards for
mathematics, while 51% were unable to meet the standard for language arts.


Annya Artigas, the director of Social Emotional Learning at the Alum Rock district, said
homelessness can affect students inside and outside the classroom. For example, many
homeless children struggle to find timely transportation to school, and once they arrive at
school, the only meal they may eat is their school lunch.


Some homeless students may also miss class or arrive late because they live in temporary
shelters outside of the district. In order to get to school, they use public transportation to
travel across town.


“There are a number of kids that we knew who were homeless who would show up late.
Before we brought them to the classroom, we bring them to the cafeteria and grab them
something to eat and grab them some milk so that they can have something in their
stomach before they went into the classroom,” she said.


As a result of these different stressors, homeless children may also struggle to stay
mentally present in school, Artigas said. Many come to school sleepy, tired and hungry,
impacting their ability to function in the classroom.


“Whenever a child presents inside a classroom, all of those things come with that child. And
all of those things are impacting their ability to engage, their ability to receive information
and process it and retain it,” Artigas said.


Maureen Smith, a professor who teaches childhood adolescent development at San Jose
State University, said children experiencing homelessness without a guardian are also less
likely to be enrolled in school. She said some children are forced to leave their homes
because of domestic violence or because of their gender or sexual identity.


“They leave the home really traumatized to begin with, and then they end up on the streets,”
Smith said.


Without a guardian, these children may not know how to enroll into school. They may also
be hesitant to go to a shelter because some programs require identification. As a result,
children may avoid going to shelters or schools because they don’t want to sent home to
their parents.


Back on the East Side, Campa said Sergio will be able to go to school soon, but she doesn’t
know when. She’s waited for more than two months to get a phone call back from the
McKinley-Franklin and San Jose Unified school districts. She started filing Sergio’s
paperwork over a year ago.


She doesn’t like to think about how her family used to live in the Jungle. Now she has less
than 90 days remaining at the hotel.


“I felt like I wasn’t doing my job as a mom because we’re homeless,” she said “We were
working but it wasn’t enough. ... I don’t want to be back here.”


Juanita Campa becomes emotional as she talk about the time she and her family lived at this homeless
encampment along Coyote Creek near Story Road on Tuesday, July 23, 2024, in San Jose, Calif. The family is
currently living in an interim housing program site in San Jose. (Dai Sugano/Bay Area News Group)