Oakland is suing Southwest Airlines for allegedly depriving its workers paid sick leave, and for breaching a 2020 settlement over the same issue.
On Wednesday, City Attorney Barbara Parker filed a lawsuit in Alameda County Superior Court that accuses the airline of violating Oakland and California sick leave laws. According to the complaint, Southwest has been denying some of its workers in Oakland the right to use earned paid sick leave. The city claims that Southwest has also retaliated against workers who tried to use their leave and discouraged them from filing complaints with the city.
Southwest is the largest carrier at San Francisco Bay Oakland International Airport and employs roughly 3,000 workers locally. The city attorney claims that Southwest’s violations have potentially affected thousands of workers.
“The City of Oakland is committed to protecting workers by ensuring that all employers in Oakland are complying with laws that protect their rights,” Parker said in a statement.
The lawsuit — filed just a couple days after Labor Day—claims that Southwest has also violated an existing settlement agreement that was supposed to resolve similar problems. In 2017, the city received complaints that Southwest had a policy whereby it zeroed out unused accumulated sick leave pay on January 1 of every year, rather than carry it forward. In December 2020, the city and Southwest signed a settlement in which, among other things, the airline agreed to fully restore the sick leave hours it had canceled for certain workers between 2017 and 2020. According to the city attorney, Southwest didn’t restore those hours for all workers.
The city is demanding that Southwest comply with local labor laws and the 2020 settlement agreement; pay restitution, damages and penalties to the affected workers; pay for the cost of the city enforcing the law; and undo any disciplinary actions taken against workers under the allegedly unlawful sick leave policy.
A Southwest spokesperson told The Oaklandside that the assertion that any Oakland employee was forced to work while sick or take unpaid absences is unfounded.
“Southwest Airlines fully complies with applicable sick leave laws in Oakland and California, as well as with the terms of a December 2020 settlement agreement with the city,” the spokesperson said in a statement. “Although Southwest remains willing to address the city’s concerns about sick leave policies, the airline is prepared to vigorously defend itself against these frivolous claims in court, including by asking the court to address the city’s own breach of the settlement agreement.”
In a press release, the city attorney said Southwest’s practices were especially detrimental during the COVID-19 pandemic, when workers were forced to report to work even when they were sick.
“We are grateful that the City of Oakland is holding Southwest accountable. We hope that Southwest policies and practices will finally change for good,” Eric Swygert, a Southwest employee and an elected ramp representative with the Transport Workers Union of America Local 555, said in a statement.
Oakland has several laws that protect workers, including Measure FF, a 2014 ordinance approved by Oakland voters that established a minimum wage and requires employers to provide paid sick leave to employees. The law also authorizes the city attorney to file lawsuits to enforce it. Last year, the City Council approved an ordinance to enhance and clarify the city attorney’s powers. This includes the right to seek financial penalties from employers who violate the paid sick leave law.
Some of the newer complaints from Southwest workers were filed with Oakland’s Department of Workforce Employment Standards, which enforces wage and hour laws in the city. Last year, this relatively new department ordered a Radisson Hotel in East Oakland to pay $404,491 to workers who were allegedly underpaid for nearly a year. The order amounted to the largest wage theft claim ever filed by the city of Oakland.