An average of two months passed between when Oakland schools were tested for lead this spring and when those school communities were notified of high lead levels in August, according to a report from this week’s Oakland Unified school board meeting.
The district’s risk management team began testing water fixtures and faucets in April and continued through the summer, but it wasn’t until Aug. 10 that district officials realized school sites hadn’t been told about it or informed of the results. In an update at Wednesday’s school board meeting, parents, students and school staff demanded transparency and answers about why they were kept in the dark.
How much lead was discovered at your school? Read The Oaklandside’s guide to lead contamination in OUSD
“This mistake has caused families stress, anxiety and panic, further limiting our community’s trust in this district,” said Max Simmons, one of OUSD’s student directors. “How can our schools be a safe place and support students in our district if we can’t even keep our water clean? When I hear that something as major as lead contamination reports getting lost in the system or not being communicated to the appropriate school or staff, it is absolutely horrifying and heartbreaking.”
District leadership — including Superintendent Kyla Johnson-Trammell, chief systems and services officer Preston Thomas, and risk management officer Rebecca Littlejohn — committed to transparency going forward and said a personnel investigation is underway to determine how communication broke down. As soon as OUSD staff learned about the test results in August, they closed access to the impacted water sources, Johnson-Trammell said.
“I sincerely apologize for the stress and concern this has caused our school sites, students and families. We understand the gravity of this situation and we are fully committed to taking immediate, transparent and corrective action,” she said.
Community members, many of whom raised concerns two weeks ago, were skeptical. During the first week of school, messages went out to families that some of the water fountains on their campuses had been put out of service and were being repaired because of elevated lead levels. Teachers from Frick United Academy of Language demanded to know why, if testing took place in April, fountains weren’t shut down until August. The school hosted students for summer programming when fountains would have still been in use.
“There is so much trust rebuilding that has to be done for our community. We have failed. And when I say ‘we’ I mean OUSD has failed at its most basic job of not poisoning our students,” said Stuart Loebl, a sixth-grade science teacher at Frick. “To start, we need an independent audit. It is not enough for Oakland Unified School District to do an internal investigation because we need to know what has happened.”
The district’s safe drinking water policy states that any water sources showing lead at above 5 parts per billion must be taken offline and repaired. Of the schools that have been tested so far, lead levels have ranged from below the district’s threshold to amounts in the hundreds of parts per billions. District leaders on Wednesday said the lead came from the water fixtures, such as a sink faucet or water fountain spigot, and denied that it was an issue with pipes or the water source.
Community members pointed out that other districts have lower thresholds for remediation. In Berkeley Unified, water fixtures testing above 1 part per billion are taken offline and repaired.
“Why didn’t you do your job? You knew months ago that the water was contaminated. You didn’t act, and you let those kids come back to school and drink poisoned water,” said Marina Muñoz, a parent at Madison Park Academy and an organizer with Communities for a Better Environment. Muñoz spoke in Spanish and had her comments translated by OUSD interpreter Rebeca Walker-Marquez. “Now who is going to cover our medical bills? I demand you test all the kids in the district. I want to find out which kids are sick with lead poisoning!”
Alameda County recommends that any families who were notified that their schools had elevated lead levels should get their child a blood lead test.
School sites will continue to be tested in five stages, district leaders said. At the 40 schools that were tested in the spring, fixes are underway for 186 fountains and faucets that had elevated lead levels. In stage two, 15 elementary schools were tested between Aug. 17 and Aug. 22, requiring six fixtures to be repaired, according to the report. Stage three includes schools with older and newer buildings that have not been tested, and at those sites students will be directed not to use water fountains in the older buildings or to use FloWater water bottle filling stations until they can be tested. Schools with buildings constructed after 2010 will be tested as part of the fourth stage in November and December, and in stage 5 OUSD’s early childhood centers will be tested every five years.
More of the FloWater stations are being delivered to schools this week, and schools will be prioritized based on the percentage of fountains that are out of service and the number of students that attend the school, Thomas said.
Addressing all of the fixes will cost money. In 2017, when OUSD was considering its clean drinking water policy, the cost to upgrade all the pipes would have been $38 million, Thomas said. Today, that number could be $50 or $60 million. OUSD’s deferred maintenance budget, which is supposed to be for facilities repairs, has $3 million in it.
Director Valarie Bachelor, the chair of OUSD’s facilities committee, said lead abatement will continue to be a topic at every facilities meeting until the issue is resolved.
“This is not new to Oakland, but it is something that we need to tackle as an entire city, and we need to have community partners, philanthropic partners, as well as our county and state folks to support us in dealing with this issue,” she said. “As we talk about budget adjustments and what we need to be funding … I will be pushing to make sure that we have a robust deferred maintenance budget so that we don’t have these issues, and so that we can tackle these issues as they happen, versus when tragedies like this occur.”
At the next facilities meeting on Sept. 19, the committee is expected to discuss a comprehensive testing schedule for all school sites and a plan to bring more water bottle stations to schools. The facilities committee includes directors Bachelor, Clifford Thompson and Jorge Lerma.
OUSD also committed to redesigning its water quality website and publishing a dashboard by Jan. 1 for community members to view test results.