Update at 4:32 p.m.: According to a post by Love on Instagram earlier this hour, the judge did not rule in Love’s favor.
As a result, Love said that she would not be running for the District 7 seat.
“While we are disappointed by the court’s decision not to place us on the ballot in November, I remain undeterred in my commitment to serving Oakland and our communities,” she wrote. “My dedication to our city does not begin nor end with a campaign. There are many ways to effect change and ensure our voices are heard. I will continue to work alongside each of you, advocating for public health, safety, and equitable development in Oakland.”
Our original story is below.
—–
A prospective District 7 councilmember sued the Alameda County Registrar of Voters last week, saying in a petition that three of her supporters’ signatures required to qualify for the ballot were incorrectly discounted due to “minor technical errors.”
Tonya Love, former district director for California Assemblymember Rob Bonta and current chief of staff for Councilmember Carroll Fife, failed to qualify for the council race earlier this month because she hadn’t gathered enough signatures. To qualify, a candidate needs to gather and submit at least 50 valid signatures; the registrar approved only 47 for Love.
Love’s lawyers, from the political law firm Kaufman Legal Group, said in their petition that Love had gathered 67 signatures in total and that three of the signatures were unfairly disqualified. One person had incorrectly printed their name in the signature box, for example, without submitting their legal signature. Two others used addresses different from the ones listed in their voter registration records, but they were still legitimate addresses inside District 7. They simply had not updated their registered addresses.
“These technical errors should not prevent the intent of the voters from being realized and the signatures counted towards verification,” the lawyers stated in their brief. “The Elections Code and Oakland Ordinances only require that registered voters residing within the District sign the petition. The three individuals who signed the nomination petition but did not have their signatures counted met these basic requirements and, in addition, substantially complied with the applicable law.”
The county attorneys countered in a brief that the state election code deems signatures on a nomination form invalid if they don’t include a signature and a printed name and if the address of the candidate’s supporter is not consistent with their voter registration form.
Under the Voter’s Choice Act, registered voters on Election Day can cast their ballots at any vote center in Alameda County. Love’s lawyers argued that the same courtesy should apply to signatures for council candidates.
The lawyers asked the court to direct the registrar to validate those signatures and place Love on the Nov. 5 ballot. There was no explanation as to why the other 17 signatures were disqualified.
After hearing both sides this morning in county court, Alameda County Superior Court Judge Michael Markman said he would issue his ruling by 3 p.m. today.
Judge Markman said that it appeared that the county registrar, Tim Dupuis, didn’t do “anything wrong” in this instance.
“My understanding is that there are other candidates for this particular district city council who would’ve liked the opportunity to have more time to gather and submit signatures, and the process needs to be uniform,” he said. “In its implementation, it looks like the ROV attempted to do that here.”
The judge also noted that he was wary of approving the request lest it turn the courts into “a clearing house for attempting to verify signatures.”
“There are only three in this one,” he said, “but I can imagine scenarios where it could be 23 in future cases.”
The lawyer representing Love said that the judge could limit his ruling to the type of unusual last-minute circumstance this represents, in which a candidate had only a couple of days to gather signatures.
If the signatures are validated, Love will become a candidate in a five-person race for a seat that opened up only because of a last-minute decision by sitting Councilmember Treva Reid not to run for reelection, citing the increasing health care needs of her mother.
The timing of Reid’s decision led to a scramble across deep East Oakland for potential candidates to run for office. It also triggered a clause in state election law that gives prospective candidates an extra five days to submit signatures when an incumbent city councilmember chooses not to run for reelection.
After Reid dropped out, Love, who had already qualified for the at-large councilmember race against 10 other candidates, decided to switch her candidacy to District 7, where she lives and where her political connections might give her a better path to victory.
But her attorneys said petitions for nominations could be obtained from the city clerk’s office only by appointment and that the earliest possible time she was able to obtain them was at 2 p.m. on the following Monday. That gave Love only about 48 hours to gather and validate the needed 50 signatures by the end of the day on Wednesday.
Her lawyers also argued that the district has a low number of registered voters, making it harder for her to secure as many signatures.
A few other candidates in the last-minute scramble were able to gather enough signatures to qualify for the ballot, among them Ken Houston. One person who tried but failed to gather enough signatures to run for the district seat was David Newton, a nephew of Black Panther Party founder Huey Newton.
In an interview with The Oaklandside last week, Newton was resigned to his failure to gather enough signatures–he picked up 37–but said he would work with whoever came out ahead in the race to help improve the community.
While on Fife’s staff, Love worked on the city’s COVID-19 budgeting and most recently helped shepherd Fife’s work with local community advocates on developing a legal tactical urbanism community pilot. Tactical urbanism is an increasingly popular way for locals to physically work with city staff to put up road infrastructure, like traffic islands, that slows down roads and leads to fewer collisions.
After Love’s lawyers submitted their petition on Aug. 20, the Alameda Court originally set a conference for September 24, but lawyers for the county asked for the hearing to be moved up to today, to ensure there was enough time to create the ballots.
The Alameda County Registrar is scheduled to send the final ballot for printing on Friday. That’s enough time for the press to print out Voter Information Guides, which are scheduled to be sent out beginning September 26. The first official ballots for the fall election will then be mailed on October 7, which is also the first day any county resident can vote early in person at the registrar’s office.
If the court rules in Love’s favor, the Registrar will be forced to change the ballot at the last minute.
In an Instagram post last week, Love told her followers her team had written a petition to validate her application to run for the district seat. She thanked the Oakland City Clerk and the city attorney for helping her through the process.
“We are moving forward because our campaign is committed to fighting for equity and social justice for our community in District 7,” she wrote. “We believe that every resident deserves to be represented and have access to the resources and opportunities to thrive.”
The message was cheered on by several community members and organizations such as the East Oakland Collective nonprofit.