Results from the June 18 Republican primary for the Fifth Congressional District are now official, with State Senator John McGuire (R-Goochland) defeating incumbent Rep. Bob Good (R-Farmville) by fewer than 400 votes.
More than 60,000 votes were initially cast for both candidates, however, Good was permitted to formally request a recount of these votes due to the margin being less than one percent (.6%). On August 1, a three-panel recount court reviewed the election returns that officials from 24 localities transported to the Goochland County Circuit Court. Later that evening, the judges confirmed that McGuire had indeed defeated Good by 370 votes—only four fewer than what was originally determined on election night. McGuire, a former Navy Seal, (once again) declared his victory in a recent statement:
“This recount reaffirmed what we already knew from the June 18th primary. It really is amazing what we can achieve when we work as a team. It is an honor to be the VA 05 Republican nominee. I want to thank God and extend my sincere thanks to my family, to everyone who helped out on this campaign, to the people who endorsed and supported me, and to Donald J. Trump. Folks in the 5th District can rest assured that should they elect me in November, they will have an effective fighter in Congress who will get the job done. I look forward to working with Trump to defeat Kamala Harris and to helping elect Hung Cao in November. Now is the time to set our differences aside and unite as a party. Together we will Make America Great Again!”
Prior to the election, Senator John McGuire was endorsed by former President Donald J. Trump. After cementing his victory as the Representative for the Fifth District, many of his Republican colleagues congratulated him on a hard fought victory, while also ensuring the integrity of the recount.
“We have secure and fair elections in Virginia, and Virginians can have confidence in the final results of this race,” Governor Glenn Youngkin wrote via social media. “I want to thank Congressman Good for his years of service to the people of Virginia’s 5th District, and once again congratulate John McGuire on his victory...John will make an excellent Congressman!”
Good, who is also the Chair for the House Freedom Caucus, released this statement following the result:
“I want to thank the more than 31,000 voters of the 5th District who voted for me in the June 18 primary, and the thousands who volunteered, contributed, prayed, and supported my re-election campaign. While I am disappointed in the ultimate outcome, it has been my distinct honor to serve as the congressional representative for Virginia’s 5th District over the past 3.5 years.”
Under Virginia law, localities relative to this election are required to cover the cost of a recount when the margin of error is at or below .5 percent. Due to the margin of this race being at .6 percent, Good and his campaign must foot the estimated $90,000 bill.
McGuire will face Democrat Gloria Witt in the November general election, with both hoping to represent the Fifth District in the U.S. House of Representatives.
A draft regional housing plan was released to the public, including a number of recommendations for affordable rental and ownership options in Louisa.
You voted:
Regional Area Events
Submit an event here to be placed on the regional Evvnt online calendar. Contact us at thecv@thecentralvirginian.com for placement in the local community calendar.
Commented
Sorry, there are no recent results for popular commented articles.